it was friday february 19
1937. a stinson airplane was traveling
from brisbane's archfield aerodrome to
sydney
there were seven people on board five
passengers and two pilots
along the way the plane was meant to
pick up some passengers in lismore
but it never arrived the official search
centered around newcastle
and the hawkesbury river hundreds of
miles south
where some people said they saw or heard
the plane the authorities took a
statement from the postmaster in
hawkesbury
he said he'd heard the plane pass
overhead just after
five in the evening on the day it
disappeared since he knew a lot about
the aircraft
the authorities were convinced by a
statement
but others believed something else
people who lived in the mcpherson ranges
on the border between queensland and new
south wales
heard the aircraft going overhead at the
same time it always did
people in the area knew about the flight
from brisbane
some of them saw the blue and red
stinson plane vanishing into the clouds
after days of searching nothing was
found at this point
a bushman called bernard o'reilly
decided to take
matter into his own hands
he lived in that high area of the
country and remembered that there had
been a powerful storm on the night of
the disappearance
a big cyclone going over the mountains
had made it impossible for the locals to
do any work
on saturday february 27th o'reilly
decided to go and find the missing
aircraft
and find out what had happened the day
before he had gathered all the evidence
on where the plane could be
o'reilly got his ruler out and drew a
line across a map
to the last known place where the plane
had been heard
he saw that the line crossed four high
points
he was sure that the aircraft had never
got beyond the nearby mountain range
he packed some food climbed onto his
horse and set out
he rode to mount bithengable then set
his horse home
he continued on foot through the dense
rainforest
he could barely see the vines in the
forest were as thick as wire netting
there wasn't much light that day and he
struggled to get his bearings
o'reilly searched for clues to
understand where he was
he looked for patterns in tree growth
and differences in the level of bloom
among the plant species
he tried to spot different birds nests
which would indicate his altitude
he spent saturday night in the wet
forest and continued his search the next
day
from the top of mount throckman through
a brief opening in the clouds
o'reilly saw some high rocks he
suspected the stinson aircraft had
crashed there
far to the southwest in the endless
green forest
he spotted a light brown tree top this
was an unnatural color for the late
summer
and seemed out of place fires happened
rarely in the rain forest
but lightning strikes were possible
could it just be a coincidence
judging by his map the tree was eight
miles away
o'reilly pushed through the forest to
reach it
when he was three miles away from the
spot he heard two voices
calling out cooys this is a shout out
used by the australian bush to attract
attention
find missing people or indicate
someone's location
he thought it could be other search
teams and answering would have confused
them
so he kept silent and continued walking
toward the location of the voices
he crossed a gorge and climbed up high
he called out to see if anyone was there
but still got no reply he walked back
600 feet along the plateau
and shouted again that was when he heard
a response
and headed toward it o'reilly finally
arrived and saw a big tree which had
been cut down
the entire trunk of another tree was
burned and there was a mass of metal on
the ground
finally he saw two men the other four
hadn't made it
the two he found were the passengers
joseph binstead
and james proud but as soon as he saw
them he couldn't talk
judging by their condition o'reilly knew
he had possibly arrived too
late to save the two men it was 4 p.m on
sunday
by that time the two men had been alone
in the forest for nine days
crowd couldn't move because he had
injured his leg and binstead had been
carrying water for both of them
they had only found berries to eat and
had lost all hope until o'reilly
appeared
there wasn't much daylight left and
o'reilly decided to head back
using a different shorter route to get
help
he came across someone on the way
o'reilly told them what had happened
and asked to borrow their horse he later
used a utility truck to reach someone's
farm and call for help
on the farm he found the number of a mr
robinson from airlines of australia
using the brisbane phone directory
o'reilly called him and explained things
and ask if he could organize a rescue
party for the two survivors
robinson agreed o'reilly and the farmer
put together two separate groups
the first party led by o'reilly would go
back to the site with a small
team including a doctor and some
supplies
they gathered at 2 30 a.m on monday left
an hour before the sun came up
and arrived at the site by 11 in the
morning
the group led by mr buchanan the farmer
included more than 100
people they started work at dawn
clearing the path that led to the
plateau where the two survivors were
the plan was to carry them down the
track to safety
both benstead and proud would have to
spend one more night in the forest
but this time they would get a tent and
medical care
when the sun rose on tuesday morning
march 2nd
the journey down the plateau started the
group cleared a 14-mile path
and the survivor's condition was
stabilized
six of the seven passengers had now been
found except for one
his name was jim westray and he had
helped the others get off the plane
before he caught fire during the
accident
that fire had lasted 15 minutes but it
was put out by heavy rain
which continued until 10 the next
morning on saturday
at 6 30 a.m before the rain stop
westray stood up and said he could see a
farm with some sheep in the distance
the other two guys tried to discourage
him from going and told him there was
nothing out there
westray said he would go there to get
help and within 30 seconds he was gone
when o'reilly arrived he was asked by
the two survivors
if he had seen westray but o'reilly was
sure he hadn't made it
he followed westray's path to a 40-foot
high waterfall
and confirmed his theory that he hadn't
survived
the operation was successful and the two
survivors made it
the story made national headlines and
there were broadcasts about it on tv
o'reilly was presented with a plaque and
a check raised from the public
years later o'reilly's nephew peter
organized tours
showing his uncle's journey to the site